I am confused about the organisation of accounts into a hierarchy --
or anyway how to represent this. 

What seems reasonable is that we want the balance sheet report to look
something like this:

#+begin_example
Assets
= Current assets
  - Bank accounts
    . «first direct joint account»
    . «first direct ISA»
  - Cash
    . «Foreign currency reserves»
= Fixed assets
  - Pensions
    . «DECC»
  - Property
    . «House»

Liabilities
    ...
#+end_example

I've indicated the “accounts” by the «» symbols. You can see that
accounts are grouped into a hierarchy depending on what kind of
account they are. ("Assets" are things you have. "Current assets" are
things that you can turn into cash readily, as opposed to "fixed
assets" which are things that might take you some time to convert to
cash.)

Note that accounts, here, are a different /kind/ of thing from the
levels in the hierarchy. "Bank accounts" is a level in the hierarchy;
the "first direct joint account" is an account. The accounts are the
atomic units of transactions. Every transaction is a movement of value
between particular accounts. You can't have a transaction which just
says "£30 to /a/ bank account", you have to say /which/ bank account.

The alternative approach would be to say that all these things are
accounts. Some accounts are just "leaves of the tree", and others are
"accounts that are aggregations of accounts." (It's possible that this
is actually done in finance because one does speak of the "chart of
accounts.") I don't think that's the right way to do things, for two
reasons. One is the reason just mentioned: it doesn't feel right to
move money into "bank accounts" or "fixed assets", so somehow the
leaves of the tree are different to the other nodes. The other reason
is that actually there are alternative ways to group accounts. (For
example, one sometimes groups assets into "tangible assets" and
"intangible assets"; or into "operating assets" and "non-operating
assets".) The hierarchy can change depending on how one wants to do
the reporting, but the underlying movement of value between accounts
stays the same.

However, it turns out that I haven't exorcised the problem. You see, I
also don't like the idea of having a level (like "Current assets")
that "contains" a mixture of accounts and other levels. I think levels
should either split into sublevels (those sublevels providing a
/complete/ decomposition of the level) or contain accounts but not
both. I don't like the alternative because then you end up with
auto-generated levels called things like "Current assets, not
elsewhere specified" which means "it's a current asset, but it's not a
bank account, nor a pension." Well, what is it?!

It's like if you grouped things by their colour. You might only
differentiate "red", "blue" and so on. But, once you start subdividing
kinds of red, you need to cover all the reds. (Maybe.) 

So it turns out that the leaves of the hierarchy are still different
from the rest of it, because only the leaves contain accounts.

So ... what is the right data structure for this system? The basic
idea is that there is a tree (of levels), and there are accounts, and
each account is "characterised by" a leaf of the tree.








 

    

